                                                    LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT
                                                    (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov




                              MEMORANDUM
TO:           Superintendents, Business Managers and School Board Members
FROM:         Zoie Saunders, Secretary
SUBJECT:      Working Definitions to Meet the Class Size Minimums Required by Act 73,
              Section 6 for the 2026-2027 School Year
DATE:         February 6, 2026



Purpose and Background
The purpose of this memo is to provide Supervisory Unions and Supervisory Districts
(SU/SDs) with working definitions, developed in partnership with the field, to address
commonly asked questions related to the class size minimums required by Act 73,
Section 6. It is important to clarify that these definitions do not supplant the rule-making
responsibilities of the State Board of Education, per Act 73, Section 8(a). The Agency
has developed this document as a response to immediate requests for support and
clarity from SU/SDs as they develop and finalize budgets and staffing for FY 2027.
To ensure that these working definitions were responsive to the needs of our partners in
the field, the AOE worked with Superintendents, Business Managers and Data
Managers to develop definitions that aligned with existing data collections, particularly
the End of Year Data Collection (DC04) and the National Center for Education Statistics
(SCED) course codes (link: SCED Finder | Fast access to school codes).
The AOE and working group recognized that the timeline for the State Board of
Education to establish final rules, the FY 27 budget development process and the initial
year for these requirements (school year 2026-2027) were misaligned in Act 73. In
developing these working definitions the working group sought to balance the legislative
intent, “…to transform education in Vermont by leveraging attainable and research-
based scale to increase equity of opportunity and promote efficiency and affordability,”
with a multi-year process marked by progress towards the class size requirements
aligned to annual budget cycles. Finally, the working group acknowledges that some of
the working definitions for secondary settings may require revision once statewide
graduation requirements are finalized through State Board of Education rule-making.
                                                LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT
                                                (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov




Requirements and Working Definitions
Calculating class size averages
Act 73 amends Sec. 6. 16 V.S.A. § 165 (a) (9) to read: The school complies with
average class size minimum standards; provided, however, that when class size
minimums apply to content areas, an individual class may be smaller than the minimum
average. As used in this subdivision, “content area” means a group of courses within a
specific licensing endorsement area
Q: How should schools calculate the “average” class size?
      A: Within a single school, in a single year, take a straight average of all non-
      exempt courses (as defined by Act 73) in a content area (i.e. # of students
      enrolled in a content area course DIVIDED by total # of courses in content area)
      OR, for the lower grades, the total number of students in a grade over the total
      number of class rooms for that grade.
Q: How should schools define “content area” when calculating the average class
size?
      A: Schools/districts should use SCED codes for standardization of course
      content areas. Core class categories in SCED include: Math, English, Social
      Studies, Science, Arts (SCED categories 01, 02, 03, 04, 05). For the purposes of
      defining content areas in elementary grades, the endorsement area is for the
      SCED Codes in 2300x codes by grade level.
Q: How should schools calculate the average class size in a school with multi-age
classrooms (e.g. 5th and 6th grade, or and K and 1st grade) where the minimums
are different for the grades included?
      A: Where there is a multi-age classroom, the class size minimum becomes the
      lower grade value. For example, in a 1st and 2nd grade multi-age classroom, the
      class size minimum would be 10 students (the 1st grade minimum).
Q: Should the age of the student be a factor when calculating class size
minimums? For example, if an 8th grader is enrolled in algebra at a high school,
how should that student be counted when calculating average class sizes?
      A: The age of the student should not be factored into the calculation. In the
      example above, the 8th grade student counts toward the math core average at
      the high school.




 Class Size Minimums Memo              Page 2 of 6
 (February 6, 2026)
                                                  LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT
                                                  (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov




Q: Do “related arts” in the SCED codes for core classes include music class, art
class, languages, health, physical education, SEL/guidance classes, or library
class? And will these classes be counted in the class size minimums?
      A: The SCED codes account for these types of classes, but not under the “core”
      class codes. For example, Music and Arts classes would all be coded under “05 -
      Music & Art”; Language courses are all coded under SCED code “24 - “World
      Language”; Library is coded under “22003 – Study Skills”; PE, Health and Safety
      falls under “08 – Physical Education” Guidance courses would fall under “22999
      –“Miscellaneous – Other”.
      The classes will be counted in the class size minimums. There may be a need for
      AOE and the LEAs to work through Miscellaneous courses to determine if they
      are exempt. A full list of SCED codes can be found here: SCED Finder | Fast
      access to school codes.

Exceptions to Class Size Minimum Requirements
Act 73 amends Sec. 6. 16 V.S.A. § 165 (a) (9) (vi) to read: Prekindergarten,
kindergarten, career and technical education, flexible pathways, terminal courses,
advanced placement courses, courses that require specialized equipment, and driver’s
education classes shall be excluded from the class size minimum requirements in this
subdivision (9). Small group services for the purpose of providing special education,
supplemental or targeted academic intervention, or English learner instruction shall also
be excluded from the class size minimum requirements in this subdivision (9).
Q: What defines a “terminal course”?
      A: For the purposes of calculating class size averages, a “terminal course” is the
      highest level of a content area offered – in a sequence it is the last one in a
      series. These courses should meet the requirement of being both an advanced
      course that is the last in a series and a course ‘above’ district graduation
      requirements.
      It is important to note that the definition of a “terminal course” will need to be
      revisited in coordination with the establishment of statewide graduation
      requirements. The current working definition attempts to capture the high
      variability in course offerings and structure across districts. It is important that
      districts document which of their courses meet the working definition of “terminal”
      for the 2026-2027 school year, with an understanding that there will be some
      differences between districts.




 Class Size Minimums Memo               Page 3 of 6
 (February 6, 2026)
                                                 LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT
                                                 (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov




Q: Are all honors classes terminal classes?
      A: No. They are only terminal if they are the last in the sequence and above the
      district graduation requirements. For example, some schools may offer honors
      algebra, and that is not the last course in the math sequence.
Q: Advanced placement (AP) courses are exempt from class size minimum
requirements. How should schools address classes that combine honors and AP
students into one class?
      A: In the case of a combined Honors/AP class – AP students in an honors
      classroom should be included in the total number of enrolled student count for
      the purposes of calculating the average class size for that content area.
Q: Are elective courses included in the class size minimum requirements? How
are “elective” courses defined for the purpose of class size minimum
requirements?
      A: Schools/districts should use SCED codes for standardization of course
      content areas. Core class categories in SCED include: Math, English, Social
      Studies, Science, Arts (SCED categories 01, 02, 03, 04, 05).
Q: Would Advisory classes (homerooms) be exempt, as those are purposefully
small for the advisors to be able to know all the students?
      A: Advisory classes are typically coded as 22 or 23 in SCED and are therefore
      exempt from the class size minimum requirements.
Q: What constitutes “specialized equipment” for the purposes of which courses
to include in the calculation of class size minimums?
      A: The working definition of “specialized equipment” for the purposes of
      determining which courses are exempt from the calculation of class size
      minimums is:
      Highly specialized instructional equipment that:
         •   Is integral to the course curriculum (hands-on use by students)
         •   Requires dedicated instructional space or safety protocols
         •   Is not standard classroom furniture or basic supplies
         •   Is used only in narrow subject areas rather than general instruction
      Common examples schools treat as specialized (aligned with CTE and lab-based
      learning):
         •   Industrial career technical machines (welders, CNC, automotive lifts)

Class Size Minimums Memo               Page 4 of 6
(February 6, 2026)
                                                  LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT
                                                  (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov




         •   Advanced tech fabrication tools (3D printers, laser cutters)
         •   Commercial kitchens, culinary equipment
         •   Media production gear (digital editing suites, broadcasting equipment)
         •   Art kilns or ceramics wheels
      These are types of equipment that support specialized curriculum, safety
      requirements, and certified instructional use, and thus would reasonably fall
      under exemptions. It is important that districts document which of their courses
      meet the working definition of having “specialized equipment” for the 2026-2027
      school year, with an understanding that there will be some differences between
      districts, but there is a reasonable effort to meet the guidelines outlined above.
Q: Which courses fall into the Flexible Pathways category? How is “Flexible
Pathways” defined for the purpose of calculating class size minimums?
      A: The Agency has signaled that there are updates that will be required regarding
      flexible pathways in its recommendations for statewide graduation requirements
      to bring Vermont into compliance with federal requirements under the Every
      Child Succeeds Act (ESEA). In EQS flexible pathways are defined as courses
      which include, “…but not limited to career technical education, virtual learning,
      work-based learning, service learning, internships, apprenticeships, community
      research, civic and community engagement, dual enrollment, and early college.
      Learning must occur under the supervision of an appropriately licensed
      educator.” There is a list of SCED codes that are used for CTE, which can be
      found in the SCED codes (SCED Finder | Fast access to school codes). In
      addition, there is a list of the “excluded courses” in the attached file.

Compliance with Class Size Minimums
Q: What is the criteria for compliance? How will schools/districts be held
accountable for meeting class size minimums?
      A: Act 73, Sections 6(b-c) outline a multi-year process for accountability that
      includes annual data collections by the AOE; the development of a corrective
      action plan, coupled with technical assistance and support from the AOE for
      districts that are not in compliance with the class size minimum requirements;
      actions that the AOE may recommend to the State Board of Education; and the
      responsibilities of the State Board to ensure that education quality standards are
      met.
      The AOE, in coordination with the class size working group and the State Board
      of Education, will publish guidance on the data collection, reporting, and

 Class Size Minimums Memo               Page 5 of 6
 (February 6, 2026)
                                                 LEADERSHIP | SUPPORT | OVERSIGHT
                                                 (802) 828-1130 | education.vermont.gov




      accountability framework once the State Board has completed rule-making as
      required in Section 8(a) of Act 73.
Q: When will the AOE be collecting class size minimum data?
      A: It is the intention of the Agency to collect this data through its annual End of
      Year data collection (DC04) which takes place at the end of each school year.
      Therefore, the first collection of class size minimums will take place in spring
      2027 and will be reported in fall 2027. However, to support the development of
      FY 2028 budgets, the AOE intends to provide ‘baseline’ class size averages from
      the 2025-2026 school year to districts in fall of 2026 based on the working
      definitions outlined in this memo.




Class Size Minimums Memo                Page 6 of 6
(February 6, 2026)
