      STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION

Small Class Size Committee:
  Charge and Work Ahead
     Implementing Act 73 (2025) and H.955
                       (2026)

            Sarah Buxton, General Counsel
              State Board of Education




                June 1 , 2026
Transforming Vermont Education

  “It is the intent of the General Assembly to transform education in Vermont by
  leveraging attainable and research-based scale to increase equity of opportunity
  and promote efficiency and affordability.”
                                                                             — Act 73, 2025




Equity                           Efficiency                 Affordability
Increase equity of opportunity   Promote operational and    Ensure long-term system
for students across the state.   educational efficiency.    affordability for Vermonters.
   New Minimum Standards (16 V.S.A. § 165)


 Grade Level                     Minimum Average Class Size   Multiage (K–8): Limited to two grade levels.

                                                              Multiple Exclusions: Pre-K, K, CTE, AP, flexible pathways,
 Grade 1                         10 Students
                                                              SPED, specialized needs & opportunities, etc.
 Grades 2–5                      12 Students                  Pathways: Flexible pathways and terminal courses are
                                                              exempt.
 Grades 6–8                      15 Students*
                                                              Safety: Specific safety-centered situations excluded.

 Grades 9–12                     18 Students*

* Required content areas only.
  Flexibility Through Waivers

SBE Waiver Authority
Schools may request formal waivers from the State Board
of Education (SBE) based on specific statutory criteria.


   Geographic Isolation: Defined by SBE rules.

   Implementation Planning: Active development of
   consolidation or mergers.
   Final Decision: SBE determinations are final.
Oversight and Accountability




Secretary's Role                  Recommendations                  Board Action
Monitors compliance over three    The Secretary may recommend      Board authority to act even if
consecutive years (Public) or     specific actions to the SBE if   other EQS or requirements are
annually (Independent schools).   standards are not met.           successfully met.
Enforcement and Implementation Limits


                         Consolidation Restrictions: SBE prohibited from ordering
                         consolidation if construction costs exceed capital
                         reserves.
                         Compliance "Pause": Noncompliance does not trigger the
                         three-year clock until rules are updated.
                         Hard Deadline: Enforcement pause ends July 1, 2027, or
                         when EQS Rule 2000 is updated.
Defining Terms




New definitions under 16 V.S.A. § 1 1 create starting place for compliance:

   Average Class Size                                             Class, FTE Class

   Teacher of Record                                              Student

   School, School Day                                             Content Area
Board Authority re: Definitions (through Rulemaking)

                        Regulatory Flexibility

                        The State Board has explicit authority to establish
                        definitions for these terms. The Board may adopt definitions
                        in rule that differ from current statutory language to better
                        reflect practical implementation needs.




                        Statutory Sunset

                        The current statutory definitions are scheduled for
                        repeal to ensure administrative rules become the
                        primary governing authority.
Class Size Minimum Rules




August 1, 2026                       Rule 2200                         Parity
Deadline to initiate rules for EQS   Independent schools accepting     Ensures consistent waiver and
(Rule 2000) and Independent          public tuition must comply with   compliance opportunities across
Schools (Rule 2200).                 the same standards.               schools.
The Road Ahead: Committee Charge

Review:
 ● Identify areas in legislative directives needing
     clarification or technical interpretation.


Draft:
 ● Create recommended language for EQS and Rule
      2200 for Board consideration.


Collaborate:
 ● Work with the Agency of Education (AOE) on
      interim guidance for districts.
Committee and Board Timeline



  Summer 2026            Fall 2026                      Winter 2027              Spring 2027


Pre-rulemaking and        Finalize                  ICAR filing and public   Finalize rules and LCAR
  drafting phase.    recommendations to                   hearings.                  review.
                         the Board.




                             July 2027: New Rules Go Into Effect
   Questions?
Thank you for your attention and service.




           Contact: Sarah Buxton, Esq
            sarah@tarrantgillies.com
        Vermont State Board of Education
